---
layout: post
title: "I played Final Fantasy 1"
date: 2024-11-14 12:00:00 +1000
author: Hugh Braico
tags: video games, final fantasy
---

(This is a WIP post, I'll add to it over time I think).

I recently replayed Chrono Trigger (SNES) for the developer ending, which
involves defeating the final boss at at point in the game where you're supposed
to be too weak to beat it. In said ending, famous designer Tetsuya Takahashi
(best known for the Xeno series of games) told me "If you thought this was
tough, get a load of Final Fantasy 2." 

And I took that personally.

Of course, if I'm going to play Final Fantasy 2, I better play 1 first, right?
Right. I picked up a ROM of the original NES version to play on my Steam
Deck. I went with the original version because I wanted to experience the
original vision for the game (though I did compromise in some ways, eg. by
using a fast forward button, and by looking up resources that wouldn't have
existed in 1990).

Here are some thoughts I had in no particular order:

## Playing with a resource is practically necessary

You can't really play this game blind. Or at least, you really shouldn't.
Playing this game without reference material would just be an exercise in
frustration. You don't need a walkthrough to tell you what to do next - just
talking to NPCs and paying attention will get you there - but you need
something like https://guides.gamercorner.net/ff to look up info on stuff.
There are 3 main reasons for this:

### There is barely any in-game info

Largely due to technical limitations, this game doesn't tell you jack shit about
what's going on. This is going to be a shock if you're used to modern JRPGs (or
honestly even anything SNES era or later).

- Spells have no stats or descriptions whatsoever, just a cryptic 4-letter name
  and (if you're lucky) a very short blurb of text when you cast it.
  - Some spells will get passed over by players because they don't seem that
    useful. `FAST` is maybe the best spell in the game because it doubles the
    damage output of melee characters, but you wouldn't glean that from the name
    or the flavour text when cast.
- Equipment items do not have stats, you figure out what their stats are by
  equipping them, backing out to the status menu, and seeing what changed.
- There is no way to see the crit rate of weapons, even when using the above.
- Equipment items don't have any descriptions of what effects they might give.
- You're not able to see which classes can equip a piece of equipment before you
  buy it.
- The only way to see if an equipment item has a "use" effect in battle is to
  try it. For most equipment items, nothing will happen.
- It's not clear if an effect stacks or not.
- Elemental resistances are very opaque. The basic ones like fire/lightning/ice
  are straightforward enough to brute force, but some things use bizarre
  elements like Time, or are element-less. Equipment items never say what
  elemental resistances they give (absolutely critical for some items).

If you play with a pdf of the manual that would come with a physical copy, it
does give you some of that info but it's still not nearly enough by modern
standards. The manual is pretty weird, it's mostly just a walkthrough of the
first half of the game. I've never seen such a hand-holdy manual before. It
does have some useful charts and stuff at the end though.

### A bunch of stuff straight up doesn't work

The game is pretty buggy and if you're not aware of it, it will screw you over.

- Several spells straight up don't work (like `TMPR` and `SABR`), and it's not
  obvious that this is the case. Some actually do the opposite of what they're
  supposed to do (`LOK2`). You could spend the whole game casting some of these
  with no idea,
- Many weapons have names that imply that they are supposed to have special
  effects (like Dragon Sword being good against dragons), but none of these
  special effects actually do anything (though you'll quickly work this out
  on your own).
- INT doesn't do anything. Spells always have the same effect regardless of the
  INT of the caster.
- I mentioned earlier that you can't see the crit rate of weapons, but it
  wouldn't matter if you could. Due to a bug, the intended crit rate is
  actually just equal to the internal item ID of the weapon, so later weapons
  have higher crit rate. This totally breaks the balance of weapons that are
  supposed to have good crit rate to make up for bad base damage (like Vorpal).
  It also makes melee fighters a lot better than intended.
- A lot more! I mentioned the worst ones though.

### There are several "no take backsies" moments

- There are 4 spells in each tier, but you only have 3 slots. Spells cannot be
  unlearned. Hence you need to make a permanent decision on what to ditch and
  what to keep. Save and reloading to try out spells helps a little bit, but
  it isn't always obvious what's going to be the right long-term choice.
  - Woe is you if you decide not to learn `FAST` on your black mage. Oof.
- You have extremely few inventory slots for armour items - just 4 per
  character, including equipped armour, which means if you're wearing a full set
  on each character you can't pick up more! There will be several times when you
  must permanently sell or drop unique armour pieces which cannot be bought 
  again.

## Playing with a fast forward button is really nice

This does compromise on the purity of the original NES version experience, but
honestly there are a lot of tedious parts to the game that are much helped by
being able to fast forward through them. There is no dashing or running, so
getting to places feels really slow, especially on some maps like the Ice Cave
which have huge linear corridors. Waiting for trash mob random encounters to
play out can also be a real bore.

## I like the lack of target correction

If an enemy dies before one of your characters attacks it, they will not try
to attack someone else. Your attack will just miss.

This sounds like a frustrating "old game wrinkle", but it creates an interesting
battle decision - do you pile up on a single enemy to make sure it dies, or do
you spread out to make sure your total DPS is maximised even though it means
leaving more enemies alive in the short term? I usually used a spread-out
strategy, or a hybrid where I used weaker attacks to make sure stronger ones 
secured a KO.

## I have complicated feelings about spell charges / Vancian casting

There is no MP system - you get a certain amount of casts for each tier of
spell per journey between inn rests (dependent on your level), and that's it.
There is no way to recover these while inside a dungeon.

On the one hand, I do like how there is a lot of weight behind the decision to
use a spell, and having to choose between different spells in a tier does give
rise to interesting decisions sometimes.

On the other hand, I end up wanting to run away from most battles because I
want to save my spell charges for the boss.

## I'm not sure I like free spells from items

Near the end of the game, the above problem flips on its head and you get handed
a bunch of items that can cast a bunch of useful spells for free. Most
importantly, multi target damage spells and team healing spells. 